In the previous weeks,
we saw how we could get
clean and transform
our data preparing
our ingredients
so it's ready to be analyzed.
This week we spoke
up the heat and get
cooking as we move to the
actual analysis phase;
drawing useful metrics
and intel from the data.
This phase, we will introduce
another power tool called
Power Pivot that will address
a lot of the limitations
of regular Excel.
What is Power Pivot?
Power Pivot is an Excel add-in
that allows us to perform
sophisticated data analysis on
millions of rows of
data within Excel.
Once enabled, you
would be able to
pull huge data sets
from a range of
sources into the Power
Pivot data model
and create relationships
between those data sets.
We can analyze data from
multiple sources without the need
for thousands of look-ups.
Power Pivot also introduces
a new language for
performing our data
analysis called DAX.
DAX stands for data
analysis expressions
and vastly increases
our analysis options,
solving problems we previously
wouldn't even have attempted.
To get the most on a power pivot,
we do need to understand a
bit about data modeling.
If you're coming from
a SQL background,
these concepts will be familiar.
But if coming from
an Excel background,
this will probably be quite new.
Let's take a moment to understand
the theory of data modeling
and how to go about it.
A data model describes
information in
a systematic way
that allows it to
be stored and
retrieved efficiently.
The process of data modeling
involves identifying
entities or tables and the
relationships between them.
For example, let's say we
want to store sales data.
We would need to
start by identifying
the tables we want to
store our data in.
Unlike traditional
Excel where we'll
often put it all
in one huge table,
what we want to do is group data
logically to avoid duplication.
For example, we might
have a table to hold
all our products with
details about each product.
Then we'll have another
one for our customers,
one for our salespeople and
of course most importantly,
a table to hold all
the orders placed.
In a data model, there are
two types of entities;
data tables and lookup tables.
Data tables, sometimes
called fact tables
store the business process.
In this case, our order table is
a data table as it keeps
track of our sales.
Lookup tables also called
dimension tables provide
context for that business.
For example, who bought the
item? What did they buy?
Where did they buy it
and when did they buy?
The customer salesperson and
the product tables are all
examples of lookup tables.
Lookup tables tend to
grow slowly and they're
usually shorter fatter
tables with lots of words.
Data tables grow
more quickly and are
generally longer skinnier
tables with lots of numbers.
Once we have identified
our entities,
we need to tell the data
model how they are related.
Taking our sales example,
we have a customer ID which we'll
probably record
against each order.
We need to tell the data
model that the customer ID
on the order is
related to the customer
ID on the customer table.
This is called a relationship.
In data modeling,
relationships are said
to have cardinality.
Cardinality describes the type of
relationship and there
are three possibilities.
The first is a one-to-one.
For example, country
to UN representative.
One country can only
have one UN rep and
one UN rep can only
represent one country.
This is a one-to-one
relationship.
The second type is a one to many.
For example, financial
year to expense.
One financial year can
have many expenses
but an expense can only
belong to a single
financial year,
so one to many.
Finally, we get a many
to many relationship.
For example, student to class.
One student can be in many
classes and likewise,
a class will have many students.
In our data model,
we really only want to use
one to many relationships.
One to one usually mean
an extra table we
don't need and many to
many tell us we're
trying to relate
the wrong tables or we
have a missing entity.
To understand this better,
let's go and add relationships
to the entities we
identified earlier.
The relationship
between customer and
salesperson will be many to many.
We can't directly
relate these tables.
But the relationship
between customer and order
is a one to many as one customer
will place many orders,
but a single order is only
placed by one customer.
We link the customer ID on
the customer table to the
customer ID on the order table.
Customer ID is what uniquely
identifies each customer.
This is called a primary
key and it is important
in data modeling to
identify the primary keys as
these are what we use
to link our table.
Salesperson also has a
one to many relationship
with order,
so let's link those up.
What about product and order?
What type of relationship
do you think this is?
Obviously a particular
product may be ordered many
times but also an order may
consist of many products.
Once again, we have
a many to many.
As there is nothing else
we can link order to,
we must have a missing entity.
One that tells us which
products were in each order.
Let's add another
entity called order
items and now we can
complete our relationships.
One order has many
order items and
one product can appear
in many order items,
so the many to many is resolved.
That is the theory.
It may seem a bit
new but this week we will
have the opportunity to
apply to a practical
example and see
the amazing benefits that
come from setting
this up correctly.
This week we have
six power videos for
you covering the
following topics;
importing data into Power
Pivot, data modeling,
analyzing data with Power Pivot,
visualizing data
with CUBE functions,
an introduction to
DAX measures and
applying time intelligence
and the calculate function.
This is all powerful stuff but
a lot of the concepts
introduced maybe new.
Take your time and
where the topics are a bit
more challenging you can
watch videos as many
times as you need.